2540 RPCN Cloud docs (#32)
redpanda-data/cloud-docs: modules/manage/pages/connect/connect-quickstart.adoc

= Redpanda Connect Quickstart
:description: Learn how to quickly start building data pipelines with Redpanda Connect in Redpanda Cloud.

Learn how to build, run, and update a data pipeline on a cluster using Redpanda Connect.

> This quickstart introduces you to Redpanda Connect fully integrated into the Redpanda Cloud UI. Using a single YAML configuration file, Redpanda Connect lets you quickly build, run, and seamlessly update streaming data pipelines. No third-party connectors are required. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This quickstart introduces you to Redpanda Connect for Redpanda Cloud. Using a single YAML configuration file, Redpanda Connect lets you quickly build, run, and seamlessly update streaming data pipelines. No third-party connectors are required. 
```

> NOTE: Redpanda Connect is currently in a limited availability (LA) release for  

Reviewer 2: No, LA is somewhat undefined. Camilo also asked about this [here](https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-docs/pull/33#discussion_r1733266760).

BYOC AWS and GCP clusters. It is also available as a beta feature for Serverless clusters, which is not suitable for production deployments.

== Prerequisites

> A Redpanda Cloud account for BYOC or Serverless. If you haven't got an account already, https://redpanda.com/try-redpanda/cloud-trial[sign up for a free trial].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Redpanda Cloud account for BYOC or Serverless. If you haven't got an account already, https://redpanda.com/try-redpanda/cloud-trial[sign up for a free trial^].
```

== Before you start

Create the cluster, topic, and user you need to build and run your data pipeline.

. Log in to Redpanda Cloud.
. On the **Clusters** page, click **Create cluster**, and select a BYOC or Serverless cluster.
. For cluster settings, enter **connect-quickstart** for the cluster name.
+
* For Serverless clusters, use default values for the remaining properties and click **Next**.
* For BYOC clusters, select the correct provider and then click **Next**.

. On the **Networking** page: 
+
* For Serverless clusters, use the default **Public** connection type, and click **Create**.
* For BYOC clusters, select a **Private** connection type and choose a xref:networking:cidr-ranges.adoc[CIDR range], which does not overlap with your existing VPCs or your Redpanda network. Then, click **Create**. 

+
Wait while your cluster is created.

> . Go to the **Topics** page, click **Create topic** and enter **connect-output** for the topic name. Use default values for the remaining properties and click **Create** and then **Close**.

Reviewer: Could we make the topic name more descriptive of what it will contain? Like processed-emails?

Author: Updated as requested.

. Finally, go to the **Overview** page and click the **Kafka API** tab. 
. Copy the bootstrap server URL into a text file. You will need it for the next steps.

== Build your data pipeline

Configure your first data pipeline on the **connect-quickstart** cluster. 

All Redpanda Connect configurations use a YAML file split into three sections:

|===
| Section | In this data pipeline

| The `input` or data source
| A xref:manage:connect/guides/bloblang/functions.adoc#fake-data-generation[fake data source] that generates a batch of email messages every second, populated with an ID, paragraph, email address, and a user name.

| The `pipeline` with one or more `processors`
| A xref:components:processors/mutation.adoc[`mutation` processor] to add a title to every email message it processes.

| The `output` or data sink
| A xref:components:outputs/kafka_franz.adoc[`kafka_franz` output] that writes messages to the **connect-output** topic on your cluster.
|===

. Go to the **Connectors** page on your cluster and click the **Redpanda Connect** tab.
. Click **Create pipeline**.

> . Enter **connect-pipeline** for the pipeline name and add a short description.

Reviewer: Can we make this name more descriptive? Also, this would be a good place to provide a description. I missed the info in the table as I was skipping to numbered steps. I imagine users will do the same.

Author: I think I've resolved this. But let me know if it's not what you had in mind.

. In the **Configuration** box, paste the following configuration.

+
[source,yaml]
----
input:
 generate:
   interval: 1s
   mapping: |
     root.id = uuid_v4()
     root.user.name = fake("name")
     root.user.email = fake("email")
     root.content = fake("paragraph")

pipeline:
 processors:
   - mutation: |
       root.title = "PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL"

output:
 kafka_franz:
   seed_brokers:
     - <bootstrap-server-URL>
   sasl:
     - mechanism: SCRAM-SHA-256
       password: <cluster-password>
       username: connect
   topic: connect-output
   tls:
     enabled: true
----

+
Replace the following placeholders:

* `<bootstrap-server-URL>`: The bootstrap server address you copied in <<before-you-start,Before you start>>.
* `<cluster-password>`: The password of the connect user you set up in <<before-you-start,Before you start>>. 

. Click **Create**. Your pipeline details are displayed and the pipeline state changes from **Starting** to **Running**. If you don’t see this state change, refresh your page.
+
Redpanda Connect starts to ingest, process, and write transformed email messages to the **connect-output** topic.

> . After a few seconds, select the pipeline and click **Stop**.

Reviewer: I missed this the first time around. I wonder if we need to keep stopping and starting the pipeline.

Author: I think the first time around it's probably useful so users get into the habit of controlling the pipeline.

+
[source,json]
----
{
    "content": "Aliquam quidem tempore expedita debitis ab. Officiis optio eveniet ab magni commodi...",
    "id": "35522c66-6fcd-47da-b97b-857b983477d1",
    "title": "PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL",
    "user": {
        "email": "oCcXPTh@RrKHZRQ.info",
        "name": "King Francis Torphy"
    }
}
----

To view the logs:

. Go back to the **Connectors** page on your cluster and select the **connect-pipeline**.
. Click the **Logs** tab and select the most recent (final) log message. You can see when your pipeline started to write data to the topic:

+
[source,json]
----
{
    "instance_id": "cr3j2rab2tks83v3gbh0",
    "label": "",
    "level": "INFO",
    "message": "Output type kafka_franz is now active",
    "path": "root.output",
    "pipeline_id": "cr3j2r6hqokqcph9p4b0",
    "time": "2024-08-22T12:39:09.729899336Z"
}
----

== Update your pipeline

Now try adding custom logging and an extra data transformation step to your configuration. You can make the updates while your data pipeline is running.

. Select the **Configuration** tab of your data pipeline.

> . Click **Start** and wait for your pipeline to start running.

Reviewer: If we don't stop the pipeline, this part isn't necessary.

Author: @JakeSCahill. See comment above.

. Overwrite the `processors` section of your configuration with the following snippet. 

+
[source,yaml]
----
  processors:
    - mutation: |
        root.title = "PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL"
        root.user.name = root.user.name.uppercase()
    - log:
       level: INFO
       message: 'Processed email for ${!this.user.name}'
       fields_mapping: |
         root.reason = "SUCCESS"
         root.id = this.id
----

+
The snippet includes new configuration to:

** Transform the name of each email sender to uppercase.

> ** Write a logging level, summary message, and reason for every email message processed, using the xref:components:processors/log.adoc[`log` processor].

Author: @Jeffail and @vladoschreiner. Is this the right component to use for custom logging?

Reviewer 3: Yes it is

> ** Write a logging level, summary message, and reason for every email message processed, using the xref:components:processors/log.adoc[`log` processor].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** Change the logging level

** Write a summary message and the reason for every email message processed, using the xref:components:processors/log.adoc[`log` processor].
```

Author: Updated as requested.

. Click **Update**.
. After a few seconds, click **Stop**.
. Click the **Logs** tab and select the most recent (final) log message. You can see the custom logging fields along with the uppercase user's name. 

+
[source,json]
----
{
    "id": "f64d1f1a-2d76-47ad-a215-52410ab4e22f",
    "instance_id": "cr3ncrvom8ofl3bn3rk0",
    "label": "",
    "level": "INFO",
    "message": "Processed email for MISS IMELDA REICHERT",
    "path": "root.pipeline.processors.1",
    "pipeline_id": "cr3me2uhqokqcph9p4bg",
    "reason": "SUCCESS",
    "time": "2024-08-22T17:33:46.676903284Z"

> }

Reviewer 3: Unfortunately it's a field that's present for all logs, it's empty because the log processor doesn't have a label value. I'm guessing that the cluster time is showing BST for you whereas the logs are showing UTC, so it'll look incorrect even though they're equivalent.

----

== Clean up

When you've finished experimenting with your data pipeline, you can delete it and the associated topic.

. On the **Connectors** page, select your pipeline.
. Click **Delete** and confirm your deletion to remove the data pipeline and associated logs.
. On the **Topics** page, delete the **connect-output** topic.

== Next steps

* Learn more about Redpanda Connect
* Learn more about Redpanda Connect configurations
* Try out one of our Redpanda Connect guides

> * Choose a connectors for your use case

Reviewer: For links that aren't actions, I'd put them under the 'Suggested reading' heading.

Author: Updated title. Links to come.

= Redpanda Connect Quickstart
:description: Learn how to quickly start building data pipelines with Redpanda Connect in Redpanda Cloud.

> Learn how to build, run, and update a data pipeline on a Redpanda Cloud cluster using Redpanda Connect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
suggest removing this sentence as it's covered in the next paragraph

Author: Updated as requested.

This quickstart introduces you to Redpanda Connect for Redpanda Cloud. Using a single YAML configuration file, Redpanda Connect lets you quickly build, run, and seamlessly update streaming data pipelines. No third-party connectors are required. 

NOTE: Redpanda Connect is currently in a limited availability (LA) release for  
BYOC AWS and GCP clusters. It is also available as a beta feature for Serverless clusters, which is not suitable for production deployments.

== Prerequisites

A Redpanda Cloud account for BYOC or Serverless. If you haven't got an account already, https://redpanda.com/try-redpanda/cloud-trial[sign up for a free trial^].

== Before you start

Create the cluster, topic, and user you need to build and run your data pipeline.

> . Log in to Redpanda Cloud.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Log in to https://cloud.redpanda.com[Redpanda Cloud^].
```

Author: Updated as requested.

. On the **Clusters** page, click **Create cluster**, and select a BYOC or Serverless cluster.
. For cluster settings, enter **connect-quickstart** for the cluster name.
+

> * For Serverless clusters, use default values for the remaining properties and click **Next**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For Serverless clusters, use default values for the remaining properties, then click **Create**.
```

Author: Updated. This instructions are now in a separate tab for Serverless (as you suggested)

> * For BYOC clusters, select the correct provider and then click **Next**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For BYOC clusters, select your cloud provider, then click **Next**.
```

Author: Updated.

> . On the **Networking** page: 

Reviewer 2: @asimms41 Serverless is only public networking, so one the first create cluster page, you just keep the defaults, then click Create. For BYOC, this networking step should probably be a substep after the click Next above.

Reviewer 2: Actually, you may want to make clickable tabs for Serverless and BYOC, so they only see the BYOC steps if they select that. Each one could start with: For cluster name, enter **connect-quickstart**.

Author: I've added tabbed content now.

+
* For Serverless clusters, use the default **Public** connection type, and click **Create**.
* For BYOC clusters, select a **Private** connection type and choose a xref:networking:cidr-ranges.adoc[CIDR range], which does not overlap with your existing VPCs or your Redpanda network. Then, click **Create**. 

+

> Wait while your cluster is created.

Reviewer 2: This should be a substep of BYOC too, since serverless is created immediately.

Author: Updated.

|===

. Go to the **Connectors** page on your cluster and click the **Redpanda Connect** tab.
. Click **Create pipeline**.
. Enter **emailprocessor-pipeline** for the pipeline name and add a short description. For example, **Transforms email data using a mutation processor**.
. In the **Configuration** box, paste the following configuration.

+
[source,yaml]
----
input:
 generate:
   interval: 1s
   mapping: |
     root.id = uuid_v4()
     root.user.name = fake("name")
     root.user.email = fake("email")
     root.content = fake("paragraph")

pipeline:
 processors:
   - mutation: |
       root.title = "PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL"

output:
 kafka_franz:
   seed_brokers:
     - <bootstrap-server-url>
   sasl:
     - mechanism: SCRAM-SHA-256
       password: <cluster-password>
       username: connect
   topic: processed-emails
   tls:
     enabled: true
----

+
Replace the following placeholders:

* `<bootstrap-server-url>`: The bootstrap server address you copied in <<before-you-start,Before you start>>.
* `<cluster-password>`: The password of the connect user you set up in <<before-you-start,Before you start>>. 

> . Click **Create**. Your pipeline details are displayed and the pipeline state changes from **Starting** to **Running**. If you don’t see this state change, refresh your page.

Reviewer 2: I tried this on main/integration but errored here: 
```
Failed to create pipeline
ConnectError: [resource_exhausted] pipelines.connect.redpanda.com "cr8g5kmlkkuc73bn2ip0" is forbidden: exceeded quota: max-pipelines-limit, requested: count/pipelines.connect.redpanda.com=1, used: count/pipelines.connect.redpanda.com=0, limited: count/pipelines.connect.redpanda.com=0
```

Author: I've tried the full set of instructions on a Serverless cluster (in integration) and all seems OK. I've yet to try out a BYOC cluster.
